---
title: "Irradiation effects of CHF on bare and porous honeycomb surface in downward-face saturated pool boiling"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2020-05-20-Irradiation effects of CHF on bare and porous honeycomb surface in downward-face saturated pool boiling
excerpt: 'In this study, irradiation effects of CHF on bare and porous honeycomb surfaces in downward-face saturated pool boiling with different downward inclination angles were investigated. After irradiation, the hydrophilicity of copper and porous honeycomb structure increased compared to that of the non-irradiated surface. For bare surface cases, CHF enhancement cannot be observed at downward inclination angles of 10° and 20° after irradiation. This is likely to be because under higher downward inclination, the bubble film departure frequency (BFDF) is larger than that of the 5° case. So there is no enough time for water to be supplied to the surface, which weakens the effect of vapor-liquid mixture area, leading to an unchanged CHF performance. In honeycomb surface cases, no CHF enhancement is observed after irradiation. This is because the macro structure became the dominant factor to determine bubble behavior, which resulted in no further enhancement in CHF. Irradiation cannot affect BFDF values for both bare and honeycomb surface. BFDF is determined by the macro structure of the surface, instead of the micro structure of the surface. The results also show that CHF is not deteriorated by irradiation in some cases, which is a good news to real-world nuclear power plants.'
date: 2020-05-20
venue: 'Progress in Nuclear Energy'
paperurl: 'https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0149197020301967'
citation: 'Kai Wang, Haiguang. Gong*, Laishun. Wang, Nejdet Erkan, Koji Okamoto. Irradiation effects of CHF on bare and porous honeycomb surface in downward-face saturated pool boiling. Prog. Nucl. Energy. 127 (2020) 103444.'
---
##Introduction

When severe accidents occurred, it was highly possible that fuel rods might melt. Some radioactive materials could be exposed to the reactor pressure vessel (RPV). Large amounts of heat needs to be taken away. As one of the counter-measurements, in-vessel retention external reactor vessel cooling (IVR-ERVC) has been adopted in many of the advanced reactors such as AP600 and AP1000 (Sehgal et al., 2012). However, advanced reactors usually demand higher cooling ability due to its bigger thermal power. The upper limit of the cooling ability is commonly known as critical heat flux (CHF). Thus, there is an increasing request for enhancing CHF. CHF is always associated with two-phase flow, fluid turbulence, and phase change. So it was affected by various factors such as inclination angle, contact angle, micro structure, macro structure (Mori and Utaka, 2017).

For the effect of inclination angle, Zhang et al. (2002) experimentally investigated effects of orientation for flow boiling. The interfacial lift-off model was modified to explain different CHF results for different inclination angles. Deng et al. (2020) conducted saturated pool boiling experiments under different downward inclination angles and concluded that CHF increased with increase of downward inclination angle. Howard and Mudawar (1999) divided surface orientations into three regions. They believed different mechanisms for each region should be developed to explain CHF. There is some research devoted to the surface modification. For example, Yao et al. (2011) conducted experiments using nanowires and observed a significant enhancement of CHF. They concluded that the boiling heat transfer was enhanced by the increased size and density of cavities introduced by nanowires. Son et al. (2018) quantitatively explained CHF enhancement by the wickability of the surface. Experiments were conducted on four different surfaces with different wettability and wickability. The CHF enhancement showed linear relationship with the diameter of dry area. Mori and Okuyama (2009) achieved approximately 2.5 times of CHF enhancement by attaching a porous honeycomb plate to a bare surface. A one-dimensional model considering the capillary force was proposed. Later, Wang et al. (2020a) studied the effect of hole-area ratio in downward-face pool boiling and reached a 2.3 times of CHF enhancement. Wang et al. (2018a, 2019, 2020b) carried out pool boiling and flow boiling experiments to investigate the gradual CHF change caused by the local repeated boiling. The carbon steel was found to be gradually oxidized in water. The CHF underwent gradual enhancement. Fewer bubbles were found to be generated on the surface and contact angle dropped after the experiment. CHF enhancement was concluded to be related to the contact angle and nucleation site density change of the surface.

In nuclear reactors, the lower plenum was under irradiation all the time. Irradiation effects have been studied by some researchers, yet no census has been achieved. It is usually denoted as radiation induced surface activity (RISA). Koga et al. (2002) investigated the gamma ray effect on titanium oxide and found that after irradiation, CHF went to 2 times compared to that of the bare surface. It was confirmed that surface wettability was greatly enhanced after irradiation. Takamasa et al. (2005) carried out a quenching experiment and found that the quenching speed after irradiation showed about 20% increase. Okamoto et al. (2002) irradiated stainless steel and found a CHF enhancement of about 20%. In an in-pile experiment in Japan Atomic Energy Agency (JAEA) (Sibamoto et al., 2007), the CHF obtained during and after irradiation indicated about 17% increase, on average, compared to that without irradiation. However, the images of the boiling phenomena was not obtained and very limited explanations on irradiation effect was made. So it is of great importance to study the irradiation effect. Wang et al. (2018b) irradiated a copper block under different irradiation dose for the downward-face flow boiling. After irradiation, a deterioration of CHF was found. More bubbles generated on the surface were thought to be the reason why CHF deceased.

The RISA effect on boiling heat transfer now draws significant research interest because it may provide an additional margin to nuclear reactor and fuel designs. However, effects of irradiation still remain obscure. In this study, we focused on downward-face boiling, rather than upper-face boiling. This is because the lower part of the RPV is spherical and the downward-face surface with different inclination angle represents the different angle along the down part of the RPV. It has been proved that irradiation can enhance CHF under a downward inclination angle of 5° (Gong et al., 2017). But it was not sure how CHF would change under inclination angles of 10° and 20°. Thus, the current study aims to investigate the irradiation effects on CHF under different downward inclination angles for both bare and honeycomb surfaces with an attempt to explain the influence of irradiation on CHF.

[Download paper here](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S0149197020301967)
Recommended citation: Kai Wang, Haiguang. Gong*, Laishun. Wang, Nejdet Erkan, Koji Okamoto. Irradiation effects of CHF on bare and porous honeycomb surface in downward-face saturated pool boiling. Prog. Nucl. Energy. 127 (2020) 103444.